= Vidibus::Oauth2Server

Allows OAuth2 authentication for Rails applications based on http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth2-v2-00.

This gem is part of the open source SOA framework Vidibus: http://vidibus.org.

It is far from being complete and stable! But this will change soon.


== Installation

Add the dependency to the Gemfile of your application:

  gem "vidibus-oauth2_server"

Then call bundle install on your console.

To get your own OAuth2 server working, some small adjustments will have to be made to your Rails application:


=== Client model

Each remote application that requests authentication has to be authorized to do this. Usually, such an application will have to provide an API key that will be validated against a local repository. For OAuth2 this API key is called "client_id".

Additionally, each client application has to provide a password to make a valid Oauth2 request, the "client_secret".

This gem will validate an incoming OAuth2 request against client_id and client_secret parameters. Thus your client model has to provide both attributes, although they don't have to be named like this.

You'll also have to provide a #domain method on your OAuth client model that returns the domain name of the client, e.g. vidibus.org. This method is used to validate the redirect_url parameter.

Before issuing a token, the Oauth2Controller will ensure that the given client_secret is valid. In order to perform this validation, a method #valid_oauth2_secret? must be given on your client model.

If you use the {Vidibus::Service}[https://github.com/vidibus/vidibus-service] gem, you'll get this method on the service model:

  # Returns true if given client_secret matches signature.
  def valid_oauth2_secret?(client_secret)
    client_secret == Vidibus::Secure.sign("#{Service.this.url}#{uuid}", secret)
  end


=== User model

Your user model has to provide an unique UUID in compact format. If you use Mongoid, you may include the UUID generator provided by the {Vidibus::Uuid}[https://github.com/vidibus/vidibus-uuid] gem:

  class User
    include Mongoid::Document
    include Vidibus::Uuid::Mongoid
    ...
  end

If you have an ActiveRecord model, implement something like this:

  require "uuid"
  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    before_create :generate_uuid
    ...
    protected

    def generate_uuid
      self.uuid ||= UUID.new.generate(:compact)
    end
  end

And don't forget the migration:

  require "uuid"
  class AddUuidToUsers < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def self.up
      add_column :users, :uuid, :string, :null => false
      add_index :users, :uuid
      User.all.each do |user|
        uuid = UUID.new.generate(:compact)
        user.update_attribute(:uuid, uuid)
      end
    end

    def self.down
      remove_column :users, :uuid
    end
  end


=== Routes

Two routes will be added to your Rails application. If you use a catch-all route, you will have to define these routes manually:

  get "oauth/authorize" => "oauth2#authorize"
  post "oauth/access_token" => "oauth2#access_token"


=== ApplicationController

In the ApplicationController of your OAuth server application you'll have to define two methods in order to perform OAuth authentication.

The first method performs the sign-in of the current user. If you use Devise for authentication with a "User" model, that method already exists and works. This is an example that works with Authlogic:

  # Calls authentication method.
  def authenticate_user!
    logged_in? or login_required
  end

The second method returns a service client with given id. This is an example taken from the {Vidibus::Service}[https://github.com/vidibus/vidibus-service] gem:

  # Returns service matching given client_id.
  # This method is called from Vidibus' Oauth2Server gem.
  #
  # In this example from Vidibus the given client_id
  # comprises the requesting service's uuid and realm,
  # concatenated by -.
  #
  # Adjust this method to your needs.
  #
  def oauth2_client(client_id)
    Service(*client_id.split("-"))
  end


=== Oauth2::UsersController

This gem will also provide an action to obtain data of the user currently logged in. The following route will be added:

  get "/oauth/user" => "oauth2/users#show"

You may overwrite the Oauth2::UsersController class to adjust it to your needs. However, if you want to use the default controller, you'll need a method on your ApplicationController to obtain a user by a given UUID.

For a typical ActiveRecord model this would be:

  # Returns user matching given uuid
  def find_user_by_uuid(uuid)
    User.first(:conditions => {:uuid => uuid})
  end

The default #show method of this controller delivers a JSON string including name, email and UUID of the current user:

  def show
    render :json => @user.attributes.only(*%w[name email uuid])
  end

== And the client side?

Well, this is just the server side of the story. To implement OAuth2 on your client applications, there are many solutions available. The basic tools are provided by the excellent {OAuth2}[https://github.com/intridea/oauth2] gem. For a sophisticated example, check out {OmniAuth}[https://github.com/intridea/omniauth].

In a typical Vidibus service-oriented environment, clients are equipped with the {Vidibus::User}[https://github.com/vidibus/vidibus-user] gem.


== TODO

* Write specs!
* Implement token expiry
* Apply changes made in http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth2-v2-10?


== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Andre Pankratz. See LICENSE for details.


== Thank you

The development of this gem was sponsored by Käuferportal: http://www.kaeuferportal.de
